There are two main methods for
clustering, hierarchical clustering and
k-Means clustering.
Our goal for this video is for you to
understand how these methods operate
before we use them to analyze datasets.
We're going to talk about objects but
keep in mind that an object is
equivalent to an observation.
Or it will be equivalent to
a customer in marketing data.
Let's start with hierarchical clustering.
This technique is conceptually simple.
The process begins with placing
each object in its own cluster.
For example, suppose that we have five
objects labeled A, B, C, D and E.
Then in the first step these objects
are placed each in its own cluster.
In subsequent steps,
the method calculates the distance between
each pair of clusters and then it
merges the two closest to each other.
Let's suppose that objects A and
B are the objects that are closest to
each other of all the possible pairs.
These objects are merged
into a single cluster.
In the third step, the procedure
merges the AB cluster with C.
And finally,
the procedure stops when merging D and E.
The final result shows two clusters.
One with A, B, and C and
the other one with D and E.
The procedure is simple.
But it needs to know how to measure
distance from one cluster to another.
And it also needs to know when to
stop merging clusters, otherwise,
it will always result in one cluster,
with all the objects in it.
You might recall that,
in the previous video,
we introduced five measures to calculate
the distance between a pair of clusters.
These measures were single linkage,
complete linkage,
average linkage, average group linkage,
and Ward's method.
Any of these measures can be
used in hierarchical clustering.
Software packages allow you to
choose which measure to use.
In terms of when to stop,
this is determined by the analyst.
Cluster analysis requires
experimentation and
often there is no single
one correct answer.
Experimenting with several distance
measures and with different number of
clusters is a common practice in order
to find meaningful groupings of data.
We will address some of these issues
in the last video of this module.
Hierarchical clustering may be
represented by a two-dimensional diagram
called dendogram.
This diagram has the form
of an inverted tree.
The horizontal axis represents
the observations and
the vertical axis represents distance.
The length of the branches
represented by the vertical lines
indicate the distance between
the two clusters that are merging.
The diagram is read from
the bottom to the top
by sweeping a horizontal
line across the entire tree.
If we start a distance of zero and
move up,
the first merger that we find is
the one of observations A and B.
At this point,
we have a solution with six clusters.
One with A and B in it and
the other five with one observation each.
That is C, D, E, F, and G.
The next merger of the AB
cluster with observation
C occurs at the distance of 1.5.
Then observations D and
E merged at distance of 2.
And observations F and
G merged at a distance of 2.5.
At this level, the dendrogram shows
a solution with three clusters.
One with A, B, and C,
another one with D and E.
And a third one with F and G.
A two cluster solution is found
is at the distance of three.
Since the dendogram contains
all possible solutions,
it is only practical to examine it for
datasets with relatively few observations.
Now let's talk about k-means.
The k-means method is very well known and
widely used.
It is scalable, meaning that it
can deal with very large datasets.
The overall idea is to assign
objects to the nearest cluster.
Where distance is measured from the object
to the centroid of the cluster.
Recall that the centroid
is the cluster average.
The value of k indicates
the number of clusters.
The process starts with the selection
of k observations at the centroid
of the initial clusters.
This selection is somewhat arbitrary.
But the procedure works better if
the initial centroids are as far apart
as possible.
Then, the rest of the observations
are assigned to the closest centroid.
Once the assignment is completed,
the cluster averages are recalculated.
These recalculation could change
the position of the centroids and
cause a reassignment of the observations.
These two steps are repeated until
the centroids do not change.
So let's take a look at a simple example.
We want to divide seven individuals
into two groups based on their age and
annual income.
To initialize a procedure,
we select David and
Clara as the initial members for
the two clusters.
Sometimes these initial objects
are referred to as seeds.
Since there is only one member in each
cluster, the centroid of these initial
clusters are the values corresponding to
the age and income of David and Clair.
Since income and
age have values at very different scales,
we use the normalized values to
calculate nucleon distances.
According to these calculations,
we assign Ann and
George to David to form the red cluster.
The second cluster, colored in blue,
has Clara, Bob, Erin and Frank.
The clusters centers are then recalculated
and they move to a new position.
The new cluster positions cause Bob to be
a little bit closer to the red centroid
than to the blue centroid, and therefore
Bob is reassigned to the red cluster.
The centroids are recalculated
once again and
this time no reassignments are possible.
The final clusters seem to
be characterized by age,
with the red cluster consisting
of all of the people under 40 and
the blue clusters with all
the people over 40 years old.
The beauty of k-Means is that
it is a very simple procedure.
The weakness is that the final clusters
depend on the initial choices.
This is why cluster analysis
software gives you the option of
running the procedure multiple times
from seeds that are randomly chosen.
Process of creating clusters
from a dataset can be viewed
as an optimization problem.
Both hierarchical clustering and K-means
are procedures that find approximate
solutions to the problem maximizing the
similarity of the objects in each cluster.
The maximization must take into
consideration that there must be k
clusters and that all objects must belong
to one cluster and only one cluster.
This is not easy optimization problem and
this is the reason business
analytic softwares employ
approximation procedure such as
hierarchical clustering and k-means.
In our next video,
we will take a closer look at
the optimization approach from clustering.
We will model the problem and
use a tool called Solver to search for
the best set of clusters.